README.md, before:

# Next MDX Remote

A set of light utilities allowing mdx to be loaded within `getStaticProps` or `getServerSideProps` and hydrated correctly on the client.

### Background & Theory

If you are using mdx within a nextjs app, you are probably using the webpack loader. This means that you have your mdx files locally and are probably using [next-mdx-enhanced](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-mdx-enhanced) in order to be able to render your mdx files into layouts and import their front matter to create index pages. This workflow is fine, but introduces a few limitations that we aim to remove with `next-mdx-remote`:

- The file content must be local. You cannot store mdx files in another repo, a database, etc. For a large enough operation, there will end up being a split between those authoring content and those working on presentation of the content. Overlapping these two concerns in the same repo makes a more difficult workflow for everyone.
- You are bound to filesystem-based routing. Your pages are generated with urls according to their locations. Or maybe you remap them using `exportPathMap`, which creates confusion for authors. Regardless, moving pages around in any way breaks things -- either the page's url or your `exportPathMap` configuration.
- You will end up running into performance issues. Webpack is a javascript bundler, forcing it to load hundreds/thousands of pages of text content will blow out your memory requirements - webpack stores each page as a distinct object with a large amount of metadata. One of our implementations with a couple hundred pages hit more than 8gb of memory required to compile the site. Builds took more than 25 minutes.
- You will be limited in the ways you are able to structure relational data. Organizing content into dynamic, related categories is difficult when your entire data structure is front matter parsed into javascript objects and held in memory.

So, `next-mdx-remote` changes the entire pattern so that you load your mdx content not through an import, but rather through `getStaticProps` or `getServerProps` -- you know, the same way you would load any other data. The library provides the tools to serialize and hydrate the mdx content in a manner that is performant. This removes all of the limitations listed above, and does so at a significantly lower cost -- `next-mdx-enhanced` is a very heavy library with a lot of custom logic and [some annoying limitations](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-mdx-enhanced/issues/17). Early testing has shown build times reduced by 50% or more.

### Installation

```
npm i next-mdx-remote
```

### Usage

This library exposes two functions, `renderToString` and `hydrate`, much like `react-dom`. These two are purposefully isolated into their own files -- `renderToString` is intended to be run **server-side**, so within `getStaticProps`, which runs on the server/at build time. `hydrate` on the other hand is intended to be run on the client side, in the browser.

First let's break down each function's signature in some pseudo-typescript-y format, then we'll look at an example:

```typescript
renderToString(
  // raw mdx contents as a string
  source: String,
  options?: {
    // the `name` is how you will invoke the component in your mdx
    components?: { name: React.ComponentType },
    // mdx's available options at time of writing
    // pulled directly from https://github.com/mdx-js/mdx/blob/master/packages/mdx/index.js
    mdxOptions?: {
      remarkPlugins: []any,
      rehypePlugins: []any,
      hastPlugins: []any,
      compilers: []any,
      filepath: String
    },
    // a provider that will be wrapped around your mdx component
    provider?: { component: React.ProviderType, props: { [key:string]: any } },
    // variable names and values which can be consumed by components
    scope?: { [key:string]: any }
  }
)
```

```typescript
hydrate(
  // the direct return value of `renderToString`
  source: CompiledMdxSourceType,
  // should be the exact same components/provider that were passed to renderToString
  options?: {
    components?: { name: React.ComponentType },
    provider?: { component: React.ProviderType, props: { [key:string]: any } },
  }
)
```

Ok with that out of the way, let's look at an example for the normal use case:

```jsx
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'

const components = { Test }

export default function TestPage({ source }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components })
  return <div className="wrapper">{content}</div>
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = 'Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test />'
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(source, { components })
  return { props: { source: mdxSource } }
}
```

While it may seem strange to see these two in the same file, this is one of the cool things about next.js -- `getStaticProps` and `TestPage`, while appearing in the same file, run in two different places. Ultimately your browser bundle will not include `getStaticProps` at all, or any of the functions only it uses, so `renderToString` will be removed from the browser bundle entirely.

Let's break down each function:

- `renderToString(source: string, options?: object)` - This function consumes a string of mdx along with a variety of potential options, detailed below:

  - `components`: Components to be made available in the mdx template, in the format `{ ComponentName: ActualComponent }`
  - `mdxOptions`: [Passed directly to mdx](https://mdxjs.com/advanced/plugins)
  - `provider`: A custom provider to wrap your mdx, in the format `{ component: Example.Provider, props: { value: 'xxx' } }`
  - `scope`: An object that will be made available for use as props to components.

  The function returns an object that is intended to be passed into `hydrate` directly.

- `hydrate(source: object, options?: object)` - This function consumes the output of `renderToString` as well as optionally `provider` and/or `scope`, in the exact same form, if either/both wwre provided to `renderToString`. Its result can be rendered directly into your component. This function will initially render static content, and hydrate it when the browser isn't busy with higher priority tasks.

### Frontmatter & Custom Processing

Markdown in general is often paired with frontmatter, and normally this means adding some extra custom processing to the way markdown is handled. Luckily, this can be done entirely independently of `next-mdx-remote`, along with any extra custom processing necessary. Let's walk through an example of how we could process frontmatter out of our mdx source.

```jsx
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'
import matter from 'gray-matter'

const components = { Test }

export default function TestPage({ source, frontMatter }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components })
  return (
    <div className="wrapper">
      <h1>{frontMatter.title}</h1>
      {content}
    </div>
  )
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = `---
title: Test
---

Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test name={title}/>
`
  const { content, data } = matter(source)
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(content, { components, scope: data })
  return { props: { source: mdxSource, frontMatter: data } }
}
```

Nice and easy - since we get the content as a string originally and have full control, we can run any extra custom processing needed before passing it into `renderToString`, and easily append extra data to the return value from `getStaticProps` without issue.

### Using Providers

If any of the components in your MDX file require access to the values from a provider, you need special handling for this. Remember, this library treats your mdx content as _data provided to your page_, not as a page itself, so providers in your normal scope will not naturally wrap its results.

Let's look at an example of using an auth0 provider, so that you could potentially customize some of your mdx components to the user viewing them.

```jsx
import { Auth0Provider } from '@auth0/auth0-react'
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'

const components = { Test }

// here, we build a provider config object
const provider = {
  component: Auth0Provider,
  props: { domain: 'example.com', clientId: 'xxx', redirectUri: 'xxx' },
}

export default function TestPage({ source }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components, provider }) // <- add the provider here
  return <div className="wrapper">{content}</div>
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = 'Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test />'
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(source, { components, provider }) // <- add it here as well
  return { props: { source: mdxSource } }
}
```

That's it! The provider will be wrapped around your MDX page when hydrated and you will be able to be able to access any of its values from within your components. For an example using a custom provider, check out the test suite.

### Caveats

There's only one caveat here, which is that `import` cannot be used **inside** an mdx file. If you need to use components in your mdx files, they should be provided through the second argument to the `hydrate` and `renderToString` functions.

Hopefully this makes sense, since in order to work, imports must be relative to a file path, and this library allows content to be loaded from anywhere, rather than only loading local content from a set file path.

### Security

This library evaluates a string of javascript on the client side, which is how it hydrates the mdx content. Evaluating a string into javascript can be a dangerous practice if not done carefully, as it can enable XSS attacks. It's important to make sure that you are only passing the `mdxSource` input generated by the `render-to-string` function to `hydrate`, as instructed in the documentation. _Do not pass user input into `hydrate`._

If you have a CSP on your website that disallows code evaluation via `eval` or `new Function()`, you will need to loosen that restriction in order to utilize the `hydrate` function, which can be done using [`unsafe-eval`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/script-src#common_sources). It's also worth noting that you do not _have_ to use `hydrate` on the client side, but without it, you will get a server-rendered result, meaning no ability to react to user input etc.

Commit message:

add note about blog example

README.md, after:

# Next MDX Remote

A set of light utilities allowing mdx to be loaded within `getStaticProps` or `getServerSideProps` and hydrated correctly on the client.

### Background & Theory

If you are using mdx within a nextjs app, you are probably using the webpack loader. This means that you have your mdx files locally and are probably using [next-mdx-enhanced](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-mdx-enhanced) in order to be able to render your mdx files into layouts and import their front matter to create index pages. This workflow is fine, but introduces a few limitations that we aim to remove with `next-mdx-remote`:

- The file content must be local. You cannot store mdx files in another repo, a database, etc. For a large enough operation, there will end up being a split between those authoring content and those working on presentation of the content. Overlapping these two concerns in the same repo makes a more difficult workflow for everyone.
- You are bound to filesystem-based routing. Your pages are generated with urls according to their locations. Or maybe you remap them using `exportPathMap`, which creates confusion for authors. Regardless, moving pages around in any way breaks things -- either the page's url or your `exportPathMap` configuration.
- You will end up running into performance issues. Webpack is a javascript bundler, forcing it to load hundreds/thousands of pages of text content will blow out your memory requirements - webpack stores each page as a distinct object with a large amount of metadata. One of our implementations with a couple hundred pages hit more than 8gb of memory required to compile the site. Builds took more than 25 minutes.
- You will be limited in the ways you are able to structure relational data. Organizing content into dynamic, related categories is difficult when your entire data structure is front matter parsed into javascript objects and held in memory.

So, `next-mdx-remote` changes the entire pattern so that you load your mdx content not through an import, but rather through `getStaticProps` or `getServerProps` -- you know, the same way you would load any other data. The library provides the tools to serialize and hydrate the mdx content in a manner that is performant. This removes all of the limitations listed above, and does so at a significantly lower cost -- `next-mdx-enhanced` is a very heavy library with a lot of custom logic and [some annoying limitations](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-mdx-enhanced/issues/17). Early testing has shown build times reduced by 50% or more.

### Installation

```
npm i next-mdx-remote
```

### Usage

This library exposes two functions, `renderToString` and `hydrate`, much like `react-dom`. These two are purposefully isolated into their own files -- `renderToString` is intended to be run **server-side**, so within `getStaticProps`, which runs on the server/at build time. `hydrate` on the other hand is intended to be run on the client side, in the browser.

First let's break down each function's signature in some pseudo-typescript-y format, then we'll look at an example:

```typescript
renderToString(
  // raw mdx contents as a string
  source: String,
  options?: {
    // the `name` is how you will invoke the component in your mdx
    components?: { name: React.ComponentType },
    // mdx's available options at time of writing
    // pulled directly from https://github.com/mdx-js/mdx/blob/master/packages/mdx/index.js
    mdxOptions?: {
      remarkPlugins: []any,
      rehypePlugins: []any,
      hastPlugins: []any,
      compilers: []any,
      filepath: String
    },
    // a provider that will be wrapped around your mdx component
    provider?: { component: React.ProviderType, props: { [key:string]: any } },
    // variable names and values which can be consumed by components
    scope?: { [key:string]: any }
  }
)
```

```typescript
hydrate(
  // the direct return value of `renderToString`
  source: CompiledMdxSourceType,
  // should be the exact same components/provider that were passed to renderToString
  options?: {
    components?: { name: React.ComponentType },
    provider?: { component: React.ProviderType, props: { [key:string]: any } },
  }
)
```

Ok with that out of the way, let's look at an example for the normal use case:

```jsx
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'

const components = { Test }

export default function TestPage({ source }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components })
  return <div className="wrapper">{content}</div>
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = 'Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test />'
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(source, { components })
  return { props: { source: mdxSource } }
}
```

While it may seem strange to see these two in the same file, this is one of the cool things about next.js -- `getStaticProps` and `TestPage`, while appearing in the same file, run in two different places. Ultimately your browser bundle will not include `getStaticProps` at all, or any of the functions only it uses, so `renderToString` will be removed from the browser bundle entirely.

Let's break down each function:

- `renderToString(source: string, options?: object)` - This function consumes a string of mdx along with a variety of potential options, detailed below:

  - `components`: Components to be made available in the mdx template, in the format `{ ComponentName: ActualComponent }`
  - `mdxOptions`: [Passed directly to mdx](https://mdxjs.com/advanced/plugins)
  - `provider`: A custom provider to wrap your mdx, in the format `{ component: Example.Provider, props: { value: 'xxx' } }`
  - `scope`: An object that will be made available for use as props to components.

  The function returns an object that is intended to be passed into `hydrate` directly.

- `hydrate(source: object, options?: object)` - This function consumes the output of `renderToString` as well as optionally `provider` and/or `scope`, in the exact same form, if either/both wwre provided to `renderToString`. Its result can be rendered directly into your component. This function will initially render static content, and hydrate it when the browser isn't busy with higher priority tasks.

### Frontmatter & Custom Processing

Markdown in general is often paired with frontmatter, and normally this means adding some extra custom processing to the way markdown is handled. Luckily, this can be done entirely independently of `next-mdx-remote`, along with any extra custom processing necessary. Let's walk through an example of how we could process frontmatter out of our mdx source.

```jsx
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'
import matter from 'gray-matter'

const components = { Test }

export default function TestPage({ source, frontMatter }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components })
  return (
    <div className="wrapper">
      <h1>{frontMatter.title}</h1>
      {content}
    </div>
  )
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = `---
title: Test
---

Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test name={title}/>
`
  const { content, data } = matter(source)
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(content, { components, scope: data })
  return { props: { source: mdxSource, frontMatter: data } }
}
```

Nice and easy - since we get the content as a string originally and have full control, we can run any extra custom processing needed before passing it into `renderToString`, and easily append extra data to the return value from `getStaticProps` without issue.

### Using Providers

If any of the components in your MDX file require access to the values from a provider, you need special handling for this. Remember, this library treats your mdx content as _data provided to your page_, not as a page itself, so providers in your normal scope will not naturally wrap its results.

Let's look at an example of using an auth0 provider, so that you could potentially customize some of your mdx components to the user viewing them.

```jsx
import { Auth0Provider } from '@auth0/auth0-react'
import renderToString from 'next-mdx-remote/render-to-string'
import hydrate from 'next-mdx-remote/hydrate'
import Test from '../components/test'

const components = { Test }

// here, we build a provider config object
const provider = {
  component: Auth0Provider,
  props: { domain: 'example.com', clientId: 'xxx', redirectUri: 'xxx' },
}

export default function TestPage({ source }) {
  const content = hydrate(source, { components, provider }) // <- add the provider here
  return <div className="wrapper">{content}</div>
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  // mdx text - can be from a local file, database, anywhere
  const source = 'Some **mdx** text, with a component <Test />'
  const mdxSource = await renderToString(source, { components, provider }) // <- add it here as well
  return { props: { source: mdxSource } }
}
```

That's it! The provider will be wrapped around your MDX page when hydrated and you will be able to be able to access any of its values from within your components. For an example using a custom provider, check out the test suite.

### How Can I Build A Blog With This?

Data has shown that 99% of use cases for all developer tooling are building unnecessarily complex personal blogs. Just kidding. But seriously, if you are trying to build a blog for personal or small business use, consider just using normal html and css. You definitely do not need to be using a heavy full-stack javascript framework to make a simple blog. You'll thank yourself later when you return to make an update in a couple years and there haven't been 10 breaking releases to all of your dependencies.

If you really insist though, check out [our official nextjs example implementation](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/tree/canary/examples/with-mdx-remote). 💖

### Caveats

There's only one caveat here, which is that `import` cannot be used **inside** an mdx file. If you need to use components in your mdx files, they should be provided through the second argument to the `hydrate` and `renderToString` functions.

Hopefully this makes sense, since in order to work, imports must be relative to a file path, and this library allows content to be loaded from anywhere, rather than only loading local content from a set file path.

### Security

This library evaluates a string of javascript on the client side, which is how it hydrates the mdx content. Evaluating a string into javascript can be a dangerous practice if not done carefully, as it can enable XSS attacks. It's important to make sure that you are only passing the `mdxSource` input generated by the `render-to-string` function to `hydrate`, as instructed in the documentation. _Do not pass user input into `hydrate`._

If you have a CSP on your website that disallows code evaluation via `eval` or `new Function()`, you will need to loosen that restriction in order to utilize the `hydrate` function, which can be done using [`unsafe-eval`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/script-src#common_sources). It's also worth noting that you do not _have_ to use `hydrate` on the client side, but without it, you will get a server-rendered result, meaning no ability to react to user input etc.
